---
layout: post
title: "Amazon EC2"
description: "In which Ian tries to set up an Amazon EC2 instance to host a small django program"
category: ""
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}
### Background
I have used Amazon EC2 once before to host what turned out to be an exorbiantly priced personal minecraft server for my brother and I to play together on.  The current attempt will leverage the *free* tier.  While at it, I'm playing with github's blog feature.

### Observations

The *free tier* appears restricted to micro, featuring all 0.613 GB of RAM, "Very Low" network performance, and "EBS only" GB of hard drive space.

I had set up a previous key-pair on a different computer, but as I'm on vacation with only my laptop, I created a new key pair and downloaded the pem file. 

As I went to set up billing alerts to receive emails if my *micro* instance beings costing me actual money, I see that my exorbiant minecraft server costs $0.99 per month to keep active.  This is not terrible, but is good to know.

### Steps To Success

Now to ssh into my newly running instance, I followed the instructions at http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AccessingInstancesLinux.html.

`chmod 400 my-key-pair.pem`

I think attempted to ssh, but received 'Permission denied'.
`ssh -i {pem file} {instance public DNS}`

I checked my security groups and made sure ssh access was permitted from my ip.  Then I discovered that I hadn't supplied a username for ssh.  Amazon uses `ubuntu@{public DNS}` for ubuntu instance, `ec2-user@{...}` for amazon linux instances.  After supplying the proper user name I was able to connect over ssh.

I then installed git and cloned my repository.  I wasn't able to clone over the git protocol without an SSH key, but cloning over https worked.

The instance came with python 2.7.3 installed.

I installed pip ` apt-get install python-pip`.

I installed Django with pip ` pip install Django`

`python -c "import django; print(django.get_version())"` show django version 1.6.1.

I decided to try `python manage.py runserver` and visit http://[instance]:8000 to see if I could view the development version from afar.  It didn't return anything.  It looks like I need to set up an Amazon security group to open port 8000 to the outside world.  But that didn't work either.


Man.  Django sucks.  All those hard-coded paths in the settings are ridiculous.  I'm going to change mountain weather to work with rails.  Now lets see if I can get a rails repo up and running on Amazon EC2.

 1. Install ruby1.8
 2. Install rubygems
 3. Remove ruby1.8
 4. Install ruby1.9.3
 5. Install rubygems (bah, this re-installs ruby1.8)
 6. Remove ruby1.8

(Might as well start with the latest)

`ruby -v`: 1.9.3p0
`gem -v`: 1.8.11

 1.  gem install rails

 `rails --version`: 4.0.2

 1. apt-get install libsqlite3-dev
 2. gem install sqlite3 -v '1.3.8'

 1. `rails blog`
 2. `cd blog`
 3. `bundle install` 
 6. `apt-get install nodejs`
 4. `rails server`
 5. *SUCCESS!!!!!*






